Hifitime blog post (#30)
model-checking/kani-verifier-blog: _posts/2023-03-23-how-kani-helped-find-bugs-in-hifitime.md

Reviewer: Can you rename this file to `_posts/2023-03-31-how-kani-helped-find-bugs-in-hifitime.md`?

At first sight, it seems like a relatively simple task to make sure that this math is correct. It turns out that handling edge cases near the min and max durations, or when performing operations between very large and very small durations requires special attention, or even when crossing the boundary of the reference epoch. For example, the TAI reference epoch is 01 January 1900, so when subtracting one nanosecond from 01 January 1900 at midnight, the internal duration representation goes from `centuries: 0, nanoseconds: 0` to `centuries: -1, nanoseconds: 3_155_759_999_999_999_999`, as there are `3155759999999999999 + 1 = 3155760000000000000` nanoseconds in one century.

> With Kani, we can check for all permutations of a definition of a `Duration`, and ensure that the decomposition of a `Duration` into its parts of days, hours, minutes, seconds, milliseconds, microseconds, and nanoseconds, never causes any overflow, underflow, or general unsoundness. In hifitime, this is done simply by implementing `Arbitrary` for `Duration`, and calling the `decompose()` function on _any_ duration. This tests is beautiful in its simplicity: small code footprint for mighty guarantees, such could be the motto of Kani!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With Kani, we can check for all permutations of a definition of a `Duration`, and ensure that the decomposition of a `Duration` into its parts of days, hours, minutes, seconds, milliseconds, microseconds, and nanoseconds, never causes any overflow, underflow, or other undefined behaviors. In hifitime, this is done simply by implementing `Arbitrary` for `Duration`, and calling the `decompose()` function on _any_ duration. This test is beautiful in its simplicity: small code footprint for mighty guarantees, such could be the motto of Kani!
```

Thanks to how Kani analyzes a program, tests can either have explicit post-conditions or not. A test with explicit post-conditions includes an assertion: execute a set of instructions and then check something. This is a typical test case.

Kani can also test code where there is no explicit condition to check. Instead, only the successive operations of a function call are executed, and each are tested by Kani for failure cases by analyzing the inputs and finding cases where inputs will lead to runtime errors like overflows. This approach is how most of the bugs in hifitime have been found.

```rust
#[cfg(kani)]
#[kani::proof]
fn formal_duration_normalize_any() {
    let dur: Duration = kani::any();
    // Check that decompose never fails
    dur.decompose();
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: You don't need to repeat this code, just point to the previous section.

---
layout: post
title: "How Kani helped find bugs in Hifitime"
---

> Hifitime is a scientifically accurate time management library that provides nanosecond precision of durations and time computations for 65 thousand centuries in most time scales (also called time systems). It is useful wherever a monotonic clock is needed, even in the presence of leap second or remote time corrections (like for Network Time Protocol or Precise Time Protocol). It is suitable for desktop applications and for embedded systems without a floating point unit (FPU). It also supports the typical features of date time management libraries, like the [formatting and parsing of date times](https://docs.rs/hifitime/latest/hifitime/efmt/format/struct.Format.html) in a `no-std` environment using the typical C89 tokens, or a [human friendly approximation](https://docs.rs/hifitime/latest/hifitime/prelude/struct.Duration.html#method.approx) of the difference between dates. For scientific en engineering applications, it is mostly tailored to astronomy (with the inclusion of the UT1 time scale), astrodynamics (with the ET and TDB time scales), and global navigation satellite systems (with the GPS, Galileo, and BeiDou time scales).

Author: Typo ;-) Will fix in the upcoming commit

The figure below shows how the effect of gravity on the duration of a second compared to Earth based clocks, like TT (blue line fixed at 32.184 s) and TAI (reference Earth time, not shown since it would be a line at exactly zero).

<img src="{{site.baseurl | prepend: site.url}}/assets/images/tai-vs-et-vs-tdb.png" alt="TT is fixed to TAI but TDB and ET are periodic" />

## Avoiding loss of precision

The precision of a floating point value depends on its magnitude (as represented by the exponent) and on how it was computed from other values (rounding modes, error accumulation, use of extended precision for intermediate computations in CPU, etc.). Moreover, some microcontrollers do not have a floating point unit (FPU), meaning that any floating point operation is emulated through software, adding a considerable number of CPU cycles for any computation.

> Dates, or "epochs," are _simply_ the duration past a certain reference epoch. Operations on these epochs, like adding 26.7 days, will cause rounding errors (even sometimes in a single operations like on this [`f32`](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2018&gist=b760579f103b7192c20413ebbe167b90)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Dates, or "epochs," are _simply_ the duration past a certain reference epoch. Operations on these epochs, like adding 26.7 days, will cause rounding errors (even sometimes in a single operation like on this [`f32`](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2018&gist=b760579f103b7192c20413ebbe167b90)).
```

With Kani, we can check for all permutations of a definition of a `Duration`, and ensure that the decomposition of a `Duration` into its parts of days, hours, minutes, seconds, milliseconds, microseconds, and nanoseconds, never causes any overflow, underflow, or general unsoundness. In hifitime, this is done simply by implementing `Arbitrary` for `Duration`, and calling the `decompose()` function on _any_ duration. This tests is beautiful in its simplicity: small code footprint for mighty guarantees, such could be the motto of Kani!

```rust
#[cfg(kani)]

> impl Arbitrary for Duration {

Reviewer 3: A simpler alternative could be to `derive` `Arbitrary` directly, e.g.
```rust
use kani::Arbitrary;

#[cfg_attr(kani, derive(Arbitrary))]
pub struct Duration {
    pub(crate) centuries: i16,
    pub(crate) nanoseconds: u64,
}
```

    #[inline(always)]
    fn any() -> Self {
        let centuries: i16 = kani::any();
        let nanoseconds: u64 = kani::any();

        Duration::from_parts(centuries, nanoseconds)
    }
}

// (...)

#[cfg(kani)]
#[kani::proof]
fn formal_duration_normalize_any() {
    let dur: Duration = kani::any();
    // Check that decompose never fails
    dur.decompose();
}
```

> In the test above, if the call to `decompose` ever causes any overflow, underflow, division by zero, etc. then Kani will report an error and the exact value and bits inputted that caused the problem. This feedback is great, because one can just plugin those values into another test and debug it precisely. One will note that this test does not actually check the output value. That's for two reasons. First, testing values for all possible combinations would require re-implementing the same code that is in the `decompose` function making the test a tautology. Second, the purpose of the Hifitime Kani tests is to ensure that the aren't any unsound operations. Moreover, Hifitime has plenty of values that are explicitly tested for in the rest the tests.

Reviewer 4: > That's for two reasons. First, testing values for all possible combinations would require re-implementing the same code that is in the `decompose` function making the test a tautology.

This sentence makes it seem like there would be no value in checking the output of the operation and that tautology checking is not that useful. However formal verification is effectively tautology checking ! So I think the message could be confusing to some. 

Could we instead say something like : there would be some value in checking that the output of the operation is as expected, if we had written a declarative, formal specification of the input-output relation of `decompose`. However this was not a goal in this project." 

And maybe save that for future work?.

We could also equivalence check this function against a second and independently developed equivalent.

Author: What do you think of the updated version?

> That's for two reasons. First, testing values would require developing either a formal specification or an independent implementation of the `decompose` function against which to check. Both options require quite a bit of effort, and the `decompose` function is really only used for displaying a duration in a human-readable format. Second, ...

Thanks to how Kani analyzes a program, tests can either be bounded or not. A bounded test includes an assertion: execute a set of instructions and then check something. This is a typical test case.

Kani can also have unbounded tests where there is no explicit condition to check. Instead, only the successive operations of a function call are executed, and each are tested by Kani for failure cases by analyzing the inputs and finding cases where inputs will lead to runtime errors like overflows. This approach is how most of the bugs in hifitime have been found.

Unbounded tests effectively ensure that sanity of the operations in a given function call. Bounded tests provide the same while also checking equalities. If either of these tests fail, Kani can provide a test failure report outlining the sequence of operations, and the binary representation of each intermediate operation, to help the developer gain an understanding of why their implementation is incorrect.

> The overhead to implement tests in Kani is very low, and the benefits are immense. Basically, write a Kani verification like a unit test, run the model verifier, and you've formally verified this part of the code. Amazing!

Reviewer 3: Could be useful to mention the number of Kani tests that are integrated in `hifitime`.
